# Published-Statistical-Work

### Description: 
<p>This repository highlights published peer-reviewed research journal articles co-authored by myself and my colleagues (HIV Prevention and Public Health Researchers). I contributed to these publications as the statistician and co-writer. My contributions included: 1) participating in the topic conceptualization; 2) discussing data sources and analytical plan; 3) conducting the statistical analysis, writing the Method section, Results section; and 4) manuscript copyediting.  The data for all these manuscripts come from multiple, diverse, and longitudinal randomized controlled clinical trials and research projects. All analyses were cross-sectional, annd these manuscripts are published in a range of research journals and cover diverse topics due to the range of data collected and research areas of interest that the faculty hold. </p>

<p><i>Below is information about these publications including their title, APA citation, publishing research journal, and descriptions about my contributions, and analytical plan. I encourage the audience to read these publications (hosted above as PDFs if available).</i></p>

<OL TYPE="1"><li><b>Disclosure, minority stress, & mental health among bisexual, pansexual, & queer (Bi+) adults: The roles of primary sexual identity & multiple sexual identity label use.</b>
  <ul><li><b>Citation:</b><br />Feinstein, B. A., <b>Hurtado Jr., M.,</b>, Dyar, C., & Davila, J. (2021). Disclosure, minority stress, & mental health among bisexual, pansexual, & queer (Bi+) adults: The roles of primary sexual identity & multiple sexual identity label use. Psychology of Sexual Orientation & Gender Diversity. doi: 10.1037/sgd0000532<br />
  <li><b>Publisher:</b><br /> Psychology of Sexual Orientation & Gender Diversity<br />
  <li><b>Analytical Plan:</b><br />First, in SPSS, we examined the bivariate associations between demographics and our other variables of interest. Then, in Mplus, we examined the associations between primary sexual identity and our outcomes using linear regression (first without covariates and then including age, race/ethnicity, and sex/gender, given evidence that they are related to bi+ individuals’ mental health. Primary sexual identity was dummy-coded with bisexual as the reference group. We also ran the analyses with pansexual as the reference group to compare pansexual and queer participants to each other. Finally, we examined the associations between multiple label use and our outcomes (first without covariates and then including age, race/ethnicity, sex/gender, and primary sexual identity). Primary sexual identity was included as an additional covariate to examine the unique associations between multiple label use and our outcomes. There were no missing data for demographics and only one participant was missing data for disclosure. Missing data ranged from 10.0% to 11.4% for all other variables and was handled using full information maximum likelihood.</ul><br /><br />
<li><b>Identifying leaks in the STEM recruitment pipeline among sexual and gender minority US secondary students</b>
  <ul><li><b>Citation:</b><br />Hall, C. D. X., Wood, C., <b>Hurtado Jr., M.</b>, Moskowitz, D. A., Dyar, C., & Mustanski, B. (2022). Identifying leaks in the STEM recruitment pipeline among sexual and gender minority US secondary students. PloS one, 17(6), e0268769. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0268769<br />
  <li><b>Publisher:</b><br />PloS one<br />
  <li><b>Analytical Plan:</b><br />Data were analyzed using SPSS 27, and all 539 participants provided data on all measures used in this study. Descriptive statistics were calculated and used to assess assumptions for planned tests (e.g. normality). A confirmatory factor analysis based on eigenvalues, using maximum likelihood extraction and direct oblimin rotation was conducted to assess both of the adapted sense of belonging in STEM learning environments scales. A series of Pearson correlations were conducted to examine associations among bullying, sense of belonging in STEM learning environments, perceived STEM climate, and STEM intent. An exploratory bivariate analysis (Chi-square test of independence, and Fisher’s exact test) was conducted to examine the distribution of sexual identities, and gender identities in each intended field of study. Simple logistic regression analyses were employed to assess the relationships among demographic characteristics, bullying, sense of belonging in STEM learning environments, perceived STEM climate, and STEM intent. Following those analyses, multiple regressions were employed to generate adjusted estimates of effects on sense of belonging in STEM learning environments, perceived STEM climate, and STEM intent. Standardized beta coefficients, standard errors, and adjusted odds ratio (aOR), and 95% confidence intervals are reported accordingly. We also investigated outliers in bullying, sense of belonging in STEM learning environments, and perceived STEM climate using the interquartile range method. There was only one outlier case found within STEM bullying. We conducted sensitivity analyses excluding this case and found no differences in our results. Our approach to dealing with Type-I error rate inflation due to multiple comparisons included employing an alpha correction that adjusted the false discovery rate using the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure, and we report the corrected significance levels. G*Power was used to perform an a priori power analyses for linear and logistic regression analyses to determine a sufficient sample size. For small to medium effect sizes (.20 or greater) among planned linear regression analyses and a minimum odds ratio detection of 1.5 among logistic regression analyses, our analyses are well-powered (power = .99; α = .05) given our sample sizes.</ul><br /><br />
<li><b>Stakeholders’ Perspectives about Cultural Strategies to Support PrEP for Latino Sexual Minority Men</b>
  <ul><li><b>Citation:</b><br />Zapata, J. P., de St. Aubin, E., Avila, A., <b>Hurtado Jr., M.,</b> Rodriguez-Diaz, C., & Robles, C. (2023). Stakeholders’ Perspectives about Cultural Strategies to Support PrEP for Latino Sexual Minority Men. AIDS Education and Prevention, 35(2), March-April 2023. doi: 10.1521/aeap.2023.35.3.185.<br />
  <li><b>Publisher:</b><br />AIDS Education and Prevention<br />
  <li><b>Analytical Plan:</b><br />Data analysis followed a thematic analysis approach utilizing several grounded theory techniques, including inductive analysis, cross-case analysis, and analytical coding of textual data. Detailed handwritten notes were taken during each interview. This included the type of participant , environmental surroundings, key aspects of the interview, emerging themes, non-verbal cues as well as, start and end times. These handwritten notes, otherwise known as memos served as a key part of the analysis and were used to help determine data saturation and codebook development.<br />
The data analysis was iterative and occurred at various stages in the process, including during data collection, memo review, and in between interviews. Each interview was transcribed verbatim by the primary researcher and reviewed by the peer auditor who read 20% of each interview. So, for example, Interview 2 was approximately 58 minutes long, so as part of the review, 12 minutes of that transcript were randomly chosen and assessed with the recording. Eighteen hours of collected audio data resulted in 521 pages of written data. These pages were imported into MAXQDA (VERBI Software, 2019) for analysis and coded using three phases of coding: open, axial, and selective. For quality assurance, the primary researcher and an independent coder, coded two separate transcripts with the codebook. Interrater reliability was high according to Cohen’s kappa statistic for the coded text with an overall value of  = .83. Disagreements were resolved by discussion between the two coders. The primary researcher then coded the remaining of the transcripts using additional tools in MAXQDA (VERBI Software, 2017) such as memoing, color coding, and the code matrix browser. These were subsequently reviewed by the auditor and debriefer. <br />
Following the coding process, codes were revised, merged, or changed if needed. Overarching themes were determined by assessing coding co-occurrence and proximity of codes through the MAXQDA Code Map function. The more co-occurrences two codes have, that is, the more similarly they are in the data, the closer they are placed together on the Code Map. The positions on the map were calculated using the classical multidimensional scaling, a method of multivariate statistics embedded within MAXQDA. A preliminary code map (Figure 1) was used to assess co-occurrence and coding similarities of all codes to determine the themes for the study.<br /></ul><br /><br />
<li><b>Rural- Urban Differences in HIV Sexual Risk Behaviors and HIV Service Engagement among Adolescent Men Who Have Sex with Men in the United States</b>
  <ul><li><b>Citation:</b><br />Owens, C., <b>Hurtado Jr., M.,</b> Moskowitz, D. A., Mustanski, B., & Macapagal, K. (2024). Rural- Urban Differences in HIV Sexual Risk Behaviors and HIV Service Engagement among Adolescent Men Who Have Sex with Men in the United States. Archives of Sexual Behavior. doi: 10.1007/s10508-024-02840-6. <br />
  <li><b>Publisher:</b><br />Archives of Sexual Behavior<br />
  <li><b>Analytical Plan:</b><br />Data were analyzed using primarily SPSS 28. Descriptive statistics were calculated for all variables. To assess demographic differences between rural and urban participants, we conducted a series of chi-square tests of independence. Rural–urban differences in HIV sexual risk behaviors were assessed using a series of Mann–Whitney U tests. We also assessed rural–urban differences in HIV healthcare utilization using a series of chi-square tests of independence. Then, we conducted simple linear (lifetime GBQ app use) and logistic regressions (HIV test, STI test, PrEP awareness, PrEP use, PrEP candidacy) to assess rural–urban differences in lifetime HIV sexual risk behaviors and utilization of HIV/STI services (see Table 3). Additionally, we ran two Zero-Inflated Poisson (ZIP) regressions using the pscl library in R 4.2.2 (R Core Team, 2021), due to the distribution of the data and excess zeros, to assess rural–urban differences in lifetime HIV sexual risk behaviors (anal sex with a male partner, CAS with a male partner). Beta coefficients were standardized (β) and odds ratio (OR) with 95% confidence intervals (95% CI) were calculated for the linear and logistic regression analyses. To ease interpretation, the ZIP model coefficients are presented as ORs for the logistic part of the analysis (i.e., zero-inflated model) and as adjusted incidence rate ratios (IRRs) with 95% CI for the Poisson regression part of the analysis (i.e., count model). A p-value (p) of < 0.05 was reported as statistically significant for all analyses. To deal with Type-I error rate inflation due to multiple comparisons, we employed an alpha correction that adjusted the false discovery rate using the Benjamini–Hochberg procedure, and we report the corrected significance levels.<br /></ul><br /><br />
<li><b>Factors Influencing Engagement Across the Motivational PrEP Cascade among Latino SMM: A Mixed-Methods Analysis from the Perspectives of Community Providers and Latino SMM.</b>
  <ul><li><b>Citation:</b><br />Zapata, J.P., <b>Hurtado Jr., M.,</b> Alvarado Avila, A., John, S.A, Rodriguez-Diaz, C.E., & de St. Aubin, E. (2024). Factors Influencing Engagement Across the Motivational PrEP Cascade among Latino SMM: A Mixed-Methods Analysis from the Perspectives of Community Providers and Latino SMM. AIDS and Behavior.<br />
  <li><b>Publisher:</b><br />AIDS and Behavior<br />
  <li><b>Analytical Plan:</b><br />Quantitative Data Analysis<br />
Throughout the survey, several attention checks were implemented to ensure high-quality data collection. The gathered data underwent scrutiny to evaluate completion, instructional manipulation, and attentional checks. Out of the 238 responses collected, 76 were omitted because they were incomplete, and another 11 were disregarded for their inconsistency. The excluded 76 responses were those that provided only minimal demographic details and failed to complete the sections specific to PrEP and HIV. As a result, the study reported a sample size of n = 151, which was then subjected to analysis. Before conducting the primary analyses, the main variables of interest were examined to ensure data accuracy and meet the assumptions for regression analysis. The results indicated that all variables were approximately normally distributed, as determined by assessing the skewness and kurtosis of each measure. The assumption of linearity was assessed using within-group scatterplots, which revealed likely linear relationships among all dependent variables. Each variable was transformed into its z-score to identify univariate outliers, and values exceeding +/- 3.29 were considered potential outliers. Additionally, the data was transformed to calculate a p-value using the Mahalanobis Distance for each observation to evaluate the presence of any multivariate outliers. No corrections were deemed necessary as each value exceeded 0.001.<br />
Descriptive statistics were reported using frequency measures. Bivariate associations and distributions were then examined through chi-square tests of independence or Fisher’s Exact Test. Subsequently, multivariate relationships were explored using multiple linear regression analysis. The dependent variable (PrEP Contemplation Ladder) was standardized. The subgroup with the larger sample size was set as the reference group for each categorical predictor in the multiple linear regression. The aim of this paper was to explore the interplay of factors and their effect on the PrEP Contemplation Ladder; thus all variables of interest were entered into a multivariate linear regression to elucidate those consequences. We report our results with unstandardized, standardized, standard error values, 95% Confidence Intervals, and p-values (α = 0.05). G*Power was used to perform an a power analysis for multiple linear regression analysis to determine a sufficient sample size. For small to medium effect sizes (0.20 or greater), our analysis was well-powered (power = 0.80; α = 0.05) given our sample size.<br /><br />
Qualitative Data Analysis<br />
Guided by the tenets of inductive thematic analyses, it was expected that it would take 15–20 interviews to reach data saturation for individual interviews. The 16th and 17th interview in this project corroborated the data from the previous interviews without presenting additional themes, suggesting saturation was achieved. This was determined using constant comparative methods. The data coding and interpretation process was undertaken by a team including the primary researcher, a researcher with a PhD in Psychology, a peer debriefer holding a master’s in public health, an auditor with a PhD in Developmental Psychology, and an independent coder who has a bachelor’s in psychology. At the onset of the coding process, two bilingual, bicultural research team members, including the primary researcher and the peer debriefer, independently coded five transcripts to develop a preliminary codebook. The initial codes were developed based on the interview guide, interview memos, and categories specific to the Motivational PrEP Cascade. Discrepancies were deliberated to achieve agreement on the application of the code, the adequacy of definitions, and the comprehensiveness of the codebook. This process was supervised by the auditor with experience in collaborating with community partners. To ensure quality assurance, the primary researcher and an independent coder independently coded two separate transcripts using the codebook. The interrater reliability, as measured by Cohen’s kappa statistic, was high for the coded text, with an overall value of K = 0.84. Following this, both the independent coder and the primary researcher, who identify as Latino and as members of sexual minority groups, applied the codebook to each interview. They focused on initial codes that demonstrated considerable “analytical power”, either through their frequency or their significance.<br /></ul><br /><br />
<li><b>A Mixed Methods Investigation Examining the PrEP Cascade among 13 – 18-Year-Old Latino Adolescent Sexual Minority Men</b>
  <ul><li><b>Citation:</b><br />Zapata, J.P., <b>Hurtado Jr., M.,</b> Alvarado Avila, A. & Mustanski, B. A Mixed Methods Investigation Examining the PrEP Cascade among 13 – 18-Year-Old Latino Adolescent Sexual Minority Men. Journal of Racial and Ethnic Health Disparities. doi: 10.1007/s40615-024-02091-0.<br />
  <li><b>Publisher:</b><br />Journal of Racial and Ethnic Health Disparities<br />
  <li><b>Analytical Plan:</b><br />Quantitative Statistical Analysis<br />
Descriptive frequencies were calculated for sociodemographic characteristics, stages of engagement along the Motivational PrEP Cascade, and hypothesized correlates. For stages 1–3, Chi-Square Tests of Independence or Fisher’s Exact Test were utilized to assess whether there was an association between independent variables and reaching that stage of the PrEP cascade. Each Chi-Square Test included only participants who reached the prior stage. Chi-square Tests for Stages 4 and 5 were not conducted because of low cell sizes. To deal with Type-I error rate inflation due to multiple comparisons we employed an alpha correction that adjusted the false discovery rate using the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure, and we report the corrected significance levels.<br /><br />
Qualitative Data Analysis <br />
The verbatim responses were imported into MAXQDA V22. Out of the 524 participants, 455 provided responses to the open-ended question. Among these, 60 were in Spanish. The first coder translated the Spanish responses into English, and the second coder back-translated them. Both coders collaboratively developed the codebook by independently reviewing the question, identifying themes, and discussing their significance for categorization. To ensure reliability, the coders independently coded 20% of randomly selected responses (n = 91) using the codebook. The first coder conducted an interrater reliability test in MAXQDA, setting a kappa reliability threshold of 0.75. The interrater reliability results demonstrated strong agreement (K = 0.78 – 0.82) across each theme (Table VI). In cases of disagreement, the coders discussed and reached a consensus on how to code the disputed responses. After reliability testing and discussion, the remaining responses were thematically coded and analyzed. Our analysis specifically focused on thematic differences related to perceived parental support for PrEP, including factors such as relationship dynamics, cultural attitudes, and other behavioral and attitudinal themes.<br /></ul><br /><br />
<li><b>Attitudinal, Behavioral, and Demographic Differences in STI Testing Among ASMM</b>
  <ul><li><b>Citation:</b><br />Alvarado Avila, <b>Hurtado Jr., M.,</b> Zapata, J.P., & Mustanski, B. Attitudinal, Behavioral, and Demographic Differences in STI Testing Among ASMM. In -writing.<br />
  <li><b>Publisher:</b><br />TBD<br />
  <li><b>Analytical Plan:</b><br />TBD<br /></ul><br /><br />
